[Music]
all right first night sky news of 2020
and we clearly have to talk about
Betelgeuse because well you've all been
asking me for about a month to talk
about Betelgeuse and we had to wait till
now to do it seriously the nice guy news
I need in December was pretty much one
of the last things that I did before I
finished for Christmas break and when I
posted it I was like god I really hope
nothing happens in the intervening month
that's like super major in the sky well
I didn't go supernova at least but it
did give us a little bit of
entertainment over the Christmas break
anyway so we'll get to that in the news
portion of this video but first up let's
start by looking up to what we can see
in the night sky in the coming weeks
all right at the end of the ones in the
27th or 28th to January look Southwest
after sunset so basically in the sort of
general direction that the Sun sets for
you and you should be able to see Venus
incredibly bright in a nice guy like
it's the brightest thing in the night
sky so if you've seen something that
bright it's probably Venus and the
crescent moon is gonna be really close
to it at that time too so you can
definitely be sure that what you're
seeing is Venus on the 27th it'll just
be below Venus and then if you look at
the same time the next night on the 28th
you'll see that it's moved above Venus
now that's a good thing to try and spot
if you're a beginner if you are a little
bit more advanced then I would also
suggest trying to find Neptune at the
same time because it's gonna be very
close to Venus in the same part of the
sky so Venus is a good sort of
jumping-off board to then find Neptune
but you will need a telescope to be able
to spot it you're not gonna be able to
do that naked eye binoculars camera
phone whatever so if you don't have a
telescope and you want a chance at
seeing Neptune maybe look up see you
whether is any astronomical societies in
your area that have all that kit already
you can go along to one of their
meetings and see if you can spot it
similarly in the first half of February
at least for northern hemisphere
observers we're also gonna be up see
mercury in the same part of the sky but
it will be very low on the horizon as it
starts to rise for us if you're in the
southern hemisphere you're actually
gonna have to wait sort of September
time to see mercury in the night sky but
my fellow Nour
mysterion's you should definitely keep a
lookout it will be very low on the
horizon so quite difficult to spot but
always very proud of myself when I do
find mercury the beginning of February
is also a great time to try and look for
the winter hexagon in the sky especially
because the full moon in February at the
beginning of the month is gonna be smack
bang in the middle of it so the six
stars in the winter hexagon the winter
circle whatever you want to call it will
literally ring the moon so find Orion or
find the moon since it is gonna be there
but if you find a Ryan and then head
sort of like down and left
Sirius at least down are left up here in
the northern hemisphere anyway so
starting from sirius head up until you
see the next brightest star which will
be pro kion then head over to Pollux
which is part of Pollux and castor in
the twins Gemini constellation then go
over to capella down to alder bar on the
very red star that's sort of the eye of
the bull in Taurus then head back down
to Rigel which I like to think as a
Ryan's sort of [ __ ] which again is a
very very bright blue star and then you
can finish the hex again by connecting
Rigel back up to Sirius again as it
happens Betelgeuse is also pretty much
back slang in the middle of the winter
hexia as well but we'll get to that by
the 10th of February I think Mercury's
going to have risen enough so that I
think pretty much everyone's gonna have
a chance of spotting
the five major planets so Mercury Venus
Mars Jupiter Saturn in the night sky on
the same day so Mercury and Venus like I
said Southwest just after sunset have a
look for those two then on the same day
or the next morning look about an hour
before sunrise for Mars Jupiter and
Saturn so Jupiter especially will be
easier to find Mars probably as well
Saturn less so but but if you can look
along the ecliptic which is the sort of
line the Sun takes in the sky and all
the other planets because well the solar
system is all on one plane then you can
sort of use that sort of imaginary line
connecting all of them to try and find
some obviously another thing to look for
in the sky right now is Betelgeuse
because it's a lot fainter than it
normally is so I guess I could have put
it this section in here but it's more
news so let's just not waste any more
time and just get straight into it
so since October Betelgeuse has been
dimming it's been getting fainter now
that's not unusual Betelgeuse is a
variable star so it's brightness changes
all the time in fact his brightness
changes on a period of about 100 to 180
days or so then it also has like a
secondary period as well over sort of
like four or five years so Betelgeuse
changing in brightness not a big deal
why then at the end of the December did
it become such a big deal all of a
sudden and there was all this hype in
the media it's because it reached a
historic low you know proper records
began sort of at the beginning of the
20th century and since then this is the
lowest in brightness that Betelgeuse has
ever been what's amazing though is that
this drop in brightness yes it's a
historic low but also it took it from
being like one of the top 11 because it
wasn't it ruined the top 10 but the top
11 brightest stars in the night sky to
being the 21st brightest star in the
night sky so that if you go out and find
Betelgeuse is sort of the shoulder of
the Orion constellation like just above
the belts then it is noticeably fainter
it used to be about the same brightness
as Rigel sort of the foot of Orion on
the opposite side of the constellation
but if you look at them both now and
compare them you can see there is
nowhere near the same brightness as
Rigel anymore and the reason that
Betelgeuse is variable is it because
it's not what we call a main-sequence
star so it's not a star in its normal
hydrogen burning life cycle like say the
Sun is it's passed through that and it's
now swelled to a red supergiant and what
happens when you get to this stage is
it's not very stable it's burning a lot
of helium in its core and other heavier
elements and so the energy given out by
those reactions fluctuates a lot and so
you can imagine this scenario where
there's energy pushing outwards and the
nuclear reactions and instead of being
perfectly balanced by the gravity
pulling inwards like in the Suns case
there's sort of this swap and change
where sometimes great
he wins for a while and the reactions
get stronger and push against the
gravity pulling inwards and so you end
up with this pulsing variable star and
that's what happens when stars are close
to the end of their lives to give you
some context if the Sun was the size of
a tennis ball
then Betelgeuse would be the size of the
London Eye it's huge it's a mammoth star
but even though it's so much bigger in
size in the Sun in terms of mass it's
only about 10 to 20 times more massive
than the Sun you could almost sort of
describe it as this red hot plasma
vacuum because the distance between the
particles is just so great it's so under
dense and yes it is ready to die it is
ready to go supernova but when I say
that it's ready or that it's close to
doing so I'm talking astronomically you
might be wondering why dimming would
mean supernova because supernovas of
these massive bright explosions in fact
if people juice did go supernova right
now you would be able to see it during
the day like you can sort of the moon
when it's a half moon you can see that
despite the glare of the Sun because
it's bright enough you would also be
able to see Betelgeuse anyway why
dimming equal supernovae is because
supernovae are triggered by the end of
nuclear reactions and essentially
gravity winning and crushing all of the
layers of the star back in itself
through the core where it then rebounds
off the solid core outwards in this huge
explosion so the hypothesis is that it's
dimming gravity is starting to win
because the nuclear reactions are
slowing down and perhaps therefore it is
going to go supernova and of course the
media jumped on this because yes it
would be so exciting if Betelgeuse went
supernova and all of us astronomers were
secretly praying that it would whilst at
the same time knowing it probably isn't
going to yet anyway what we do expect is
that because it started dimming in
October that's about a hundred or so
days ago which is the period of sort of
Betelgeuse is normal dips and brightness
that we have recorded before so in
theory Betelgeuse is brightness should
start
climbing again as we get into sort of
February March time and through the
early parts of 2020 if that happens then
we know that this was just a random flu
you can probably Beetlejuice it's fine
and it's probably still not going to go
supernova anytime soon at least in our
lifetimes we have tried to estimate how
long buccal juice has actually got
though based on you know the models we
have for stellar evolution that sort of
explain and stars that we see in the sky
which aren't perfect but they do a
pretty good job and based on the all the
things we know about Betelgeuse so its
mass its size its rotation period its
periodicity and how often it varies how
many heavy elements it's got inside of
it which we get from sort of that
quantum fingerprint of light from
Betelgeuse and applying all that to the
models that we know this paper that came
out in 2014 which was led by Dolan and
collaborators found an estimate of a
hundred thousand years left in
Betelgeuse his lifetime now obviously
that has some uncertainty on it but it's
not a hundred thousand years plus or
minus 100,000 years in which case we
don't think the Betelgeuse is going to
explode anytime soon having said all
that that's still our best educated
guess from the current best theories we
have and it could turn out that
Betelgeuse massively surprises as all
which admittedly ok next up I want to
talk about Proxima Centauri so many of
you might know that is the closest star
to the Sun we discovered a planet around
it not that long ago Proxima Centauri B
that made a lot of waves which was very
exciting but what if it had two planets
Proxima Centauri C was just announced
this is a super earth so it's more
massive than the earth they estimate it
to be about 1.9 times the mass of the
earth and it has about a five year
period so it's quite far away from its
star and crucially its star is actually
a red dwarf star so it's nowhere near as
hot as the Sun so Proxima Centauri B
which was the planet they found back in
2016 was in the habitable zone of that
star and it only had a period of 11 days
it was only something like 5
percent of the distance between the
Earth and Sun that it was orbiting
around its star Proxima Centauri and
that put it in the habitable zone can
you imagine like an 11-day year the
seasons would last like three days each
that would be crazy
the Proxima Centuri sea being a lot
further out from its star needing five
earth years to go around means that it's
probably about minus 200 degrees C so
probably not as exciting as discovering
a planet in the habitable zone around
our nearest star but still excited to
know that our nearest star has like a
system it's a star system just like the
solar system is one lone star on a
planet it is at least two they think
they do need more observations to
confirm the result that they found so it
will probably be one of the key targets
to take a direct image of that star
system with the James Webb Space
Telescope when it launches next year
2021 come on James Webb Space Telescope
so I'm really excited to see where the
James Webb can spot it and whether
that'll confirm its existence as well
and now we turn our attention back to
the crisis in cosmology which I know a
lot of you are like it's not a crisis
the climate crisis is a crisis yes but
it's been Dubbs now that's what it's
known as we're rolling with it and
because it's been dumped and given a
name there seem to be these flurry of
results now that are coming out with
people trying to explain what might be
the issue here so for those who haven't
heard about this crisis in cosmology
this well I did make another night sky
news on this a couple of months ago so
if you haven't maybe seen that maybe go
watch it but in summary we don't really
know the age of the universe very well
and we're wondering whether it's because
there's something wrong in our models of
sort of a universe that has 5% matter
sort of 20 ish percent dark matter and
then sort of 70% dark energy which is
sort of a force that's acting opposite
to gravity to cause the expansion of the
universe and we also think that it's
causing accelerated expansion of the
universe as well but
all these different methods of working
out what rate that expansion is
happening at and how old the age of the
universe is therefore because of it are
all giving us different answers and then
back in November people like or maybe we
can fix this if we let a couple of other
parameters in our model change and when
they did that they ended up with a
different shape to universe than we
previously saw and also it kind of made
everything worse as well so basically
all of our sort of best models of the
universe are a little bit up in the air
because we're trying to use the
observations and the data we have to
construct a good model but when all of
those conflict it's a little bit
difficult so there's a couple of
different ways you might be able to
attempt to fix this the first one is to
find if there is an error in the data we
are using or perhaps there's some
assumption we've made that effects
everything and it's sort of like a
cascade downwards the other way is
finding a method that is completely
independent of all the other methods to
see what that gives us that's a little
bit difficult because sometimes there's
some piece of knowledge that we've
learned from by studying this thing that
uses in this method that we need for
that method and so it is kind of
circular but there are ways we can do it
if we're clever about it so there's a
paper that came out right at the end of
December by Tang and collaborators that
took the first approach the let's see if
there's an error in our data or our
assumption somewhere that might be
affecting everything and what they
looked at in particular was supernovae
so supernovae have been used for a long
time to try and measure the expansion of
the universe because there's a specific
type of supernovae got a type 1a it's
not a very inventive name I know they're
always explodes with the exact same
brightness and we know that's the exact
same brightness because physics tells us
it is that way what's happening is that
there is what's called a white dwarf
star which is held up by the pressure of
trying to push electrons together and
they're repelling each other and it's
literally sort of like the the densest
way you can pack sort of atoms with free
electrons at least around them and
that's orbiting another
the star and because that is very very
dense it's dragging off a lot of the
material from the other star and slowly
it builds up its mass and built up its
mass and gravity pushing inwards on the
little white dwarf star is getting
stronger and trying to crush those
electrons together more now eventually
you reach a point where gravity is
strong enough to overcome that force of
electrons repelling each other when that
happens it goes supernova now we know
the charge and electron very well it's
been measured many many many many many
many times so we can work out the force
that there would be between two of those
electrons repelling each other you would
then know how much gravitational force
you would need to overcome that and
force them together so you can work out
how massive the star would have to be in
order for it to essentially crush itself
and because the charge doesn't change
then the force that you would need from
gravity doesn't change and therefore the
mass doesn't change and then because of
e equals MC squared the energy and
therefore the brightness you get out
doesn't change and so that is an
assumption that has underpinned every
supernova study because if it doesn't
change then wherever you observe it in
the universe then you can work out how
far away it is because of how bright it
appears compared to how bright you know
it should be so then you have a distance
to say a galaxy that's billions of
light-years away because the supernova
went off in it a type 1a supernova you
can then measure the redshift of that
galaxy ie how fast it's moving away from
you because of the expansion of space
and if you do that lots and lots and
lots of times you essentially get the
rate that the expansion is happening at
with distance and therefore you can see
if it's accelerating expanding ie the
large the distance you get to the more
the universe is expanded than you would
have thought now that works showing that
with supernovae won the Nobel Prize
about a decade ago and rightly so as
well it was a major discovery showing
that the universe wasn't just expanding
it was accelerating in its expansion now
this work led by King at the end of
December questioned that basic
assumption that it should always go off
at the same brightness
because some models have shown that if
the white dwarf star wasn't just pure
helium atoms if it had some trace
heavier elements in there like carbon or
oxygen or nitrogen something like that
then that could actually affect the
repelling forces between electrons
disrupt it and so it would actually
explode it a slightly different mass
giving you a slightly different
brightness and that's actually really
important because if we think about sort
of the very early universe stars form
the first generation of stars they're
forming from pretty much pure hydrogen
they send a lot of it into helium
some of them go supernova and put traces
of carbon oxygen nitrogen in the
surrounding area a new generation of
stars forms from that material then it's
not forming from pure hydrogen it starts
with something that already got a couple
of traces of those elements in those the
same thing again puts more of those
elements into the surrounding area now
that's great
for the solar system because by the time
the Sun formed there was enough of that
stuff to make the earth and you and me
but it means that when you then form a
white dwarf which is probably what the
sun's gonna end up as you're gonna have
a lot more trace elements in there than
you did say a white dwarf that was
formed at the very beginning of the
universe say a billion years after the
universe formed rather than 13 billion
years after the universe spawned
so what Kang was looking at was whether
the brightness of a supernova changes
with say the mass of the galaxy that's
in or the star formation rate of a
galaxy that's in or maybe even just the
shape of the galaxy because the shape of
the galaxy sort of traces how many
mergers it's had in its history and
mergers bring in fresh gas and maybe
that could be contaminated by more and
more metals or maybe it's pure gas it
all depends so from the apparent
brightness that we observe at greater
distances we might actually infer that
it's closer to us than it actually is
which means that that piece of evidence
we have that accelerated expansion over
the universe that won the Nobel Prize
actually the ones that great the
distance might be further away than we
originally thought and that could
actually be a straight line and it's
just the universe is expanding
but not accelerating expanding and dark
energy might not be as big of a
component of the universe's we first
thought maybe but there is so much other
evidence from other different methods
that don't actually rely on the
supernova that showed that dark energy
still does exist so it's very confusing
like just six months ago there was a
paper led by Wang and collaborators that
looked at the second option I said look
for an independent method that doesn't
rely on the supernova or the Cosmic
Microwave Background which is another
very oft used method to look at this
thing and instead they actually looked
at the lensing of galaxy so background
galaxies by big clusters of galaxies in
the foreground and they ended up finding
evidence for dark energy that was pretty
much the same amount as suggested by
supernovae before you do all these
corrections due to the age of the
population this is a little difficult to
wrap up now
but essentially everything contradicts
everything in the minute which is a good
thing because if everything was fine
we wouldn't be learning more and that's
what science is all about learning what
we can when nothing makes sense
crucially I think what all these results
are telling us is that our current best
model that one is sort of five percent
matter and twenty percent dark matter
and seven percent dark energy and an
accelerating expanding universe might
just be a little bit too simple to
explain what we're seeing and we
actually need another layer of
complexity that we haven't wrapped our
heads around yet which we shouldn't be
surprised about the universe doesn't
exist so that we can understand it right
it would be arrogant of us to assume
that the grand theory of to explain the
entire universe should be understood
easily by us humans and should be a nice
simple theory that we can package up
with a bow because the results are
showing us the observations we make is
showing us that is not the case at all
but we can sure as hell try
just before we get to the bloopers I
want to tell you about an exciting new
podcast that I've got involved with it
is the Royal Astronomical Society 200th
anniversary year and to celebrate this
they're doing a podcast every month on a
whole host of different topics
I am the co-host of this podcast and we
were recording one each month in the
Royal Astronomical Society council room
which let me tell you is incredible this
month's podcast is already out and you
can hear it wherever you find podcasts
but I will put the links in the
description below as well this month's
theme was black holes and Dark Matter
the unseen if you will which obviously I
loved talking about I even got to touch
a second edition copy of Copernicus's
book as well which I still haven't quite
wrapped my head around being able to do
but I did and I hope that you will all
enjoy it at least getting to hear me
through proper night radio quality
microphones as well rather than this
piddly little thing which I have at home
so if you're up for that go check it out
the RAS this podcast is called never
mind the space rocks I started recording
and I haven't like lead in yet because
this thanks passed me chaos the Ariat
would forget what I always said you know
physicists they must know all the laws
of nature and the world or non of this
kind of stuff must ever happen to them
well you know what we're all so lazy
busy and so we end up in this horrendous
situation haha that's a really good
feeling to have a balmy to cable stupid
flimsy top okay
hello that topic did not do good I went
and changed it from serious you're gonna
go up to poor Kyle
and then Pollux in the Gemini
constellation the twins and then over to
why do I always forget cappellas name
Pelican Pelican Pelican Bella pots
develop pots per but a paper that came
out in 2014 tried to put a number on how
long Betelgeuse had left to live it was
led by Dolan and collaborators just
realized makes it sound like the Dolan
twins wrote it oh I'd love that they're
taking a break from YouTube and they
wrote an astrophysics paper toss a coin
to your what sure Ovalle plenty o valley
plenty mmm there's a crisis in cosmology
doesn't fit don't make it don't try make
it fit there's a crisis just so point to
the crisis so in cosmology Loen
cosmology